
In Linux/Unix, everything is a file. Regular file, Directories, and even Devices are files. Every File has an associated number called File Descriptor (FD). 
 Ex : Your screen also has a File Descriptor.
Whenever you execute a program/command at the terminal, 3 files are always open, viz., standard input, standard output, standard error.


1."sudo apt-get install packagename" :to install the software.
2."sudo apt-get update" : to update the system.
3.You can also send e-mails from terminal using the 'mail' command 
     example : "mail -s 'subject' -c 'cc-address' -b 'bcc-address' 'to-address' "
               ( mail -s "news" adkad@gmail.com
             hi 
              this is news of the day.
             1.adadddsd
             2.sd........)
Press Cntrl+D you are finished writing the mail. The mail will be sent to the mentioned address. 
4. "cat > filename"            Creates a new file 
5. "cat filename"              to display the content of the file
6. "cat file1 file2 > file3 "  Joins two files (file1, file2) and stores the output in a new file (file3)
7. "mv  file "new file path" " Moves the files to the new location 
8. "mv filename new_file_name" Renames the file to a new filename
10. "sudo"                     Allows regular users to run programs with the security privileges of the superuser or root 
11. "rm"                       Deletes a file
12. "man"                      Gives help information on a command
13. "history"                  Gives a list of all past commands typed in the current terminal session 
14. "mkdir"                    Creates a new directory in the present working directory or at the specified path
15. "rmdir"                    Deletes a directory
16. "pr -x"                    Divides the file into x columns
16.1."pr -h"                   Assigns a header to the file
16.2. "pr -n"                  Denotes the file with Line Numbers
17. "lp -nc" or "lpr c"        Prints "c" copies of the File 
18. "lp -dprintrname" or 
    "lp -Pprintername"         Specifies name of the printer
19."chmod permissions filename"we can set permissions (read, write, execute) on a file/directory for the owner, group and the world. 
    example : "chmode o=rwx filename" or "chmode u+x file name" or "chmode g-w filename"......
     u    user/owner
     g    group
     o    other
     a    all

     + 	Adds a permission to a file or directory
     - 	Removes the permission
     = 	Sets the permission and overrides the permissions set earlier.
20."chown user"                 For changing the ownership of a file/directory,
21."chown user:group filename"  In case you want to change the user as well as group for a file or directory.
22. "chgrp group_name filename" In case you want to change group-owner only, 
23. "groups"                    To find the all the groups you are a member of
24. "newgrp groupname "         To work as a member a group other than your default group
25. "ls -al > listings"         Here the output of command ls -al is re-directed to file "listings" instead of your screen. ">" is used for STDOUT output.
                                You can redirect standard output, to not just files, but also devices! 
                                ex: cat music.mp3 > /dev/audio
                                The cat command reads the file music.mp3 and sends the output to /dev/audio which is the audio device. 
                                If the sound configurations in your PC are correct, this command will play the file music.mp3
26. "Mail -s "Subject" to-address < Filename "   The '<' symbol is used for input(STDIN) redirection 
                                If you want to attach a File to email you can use the input re-direction operator

          The Pipe is a command in Linux that lets you use two or more commands such that output of one command serves as input to the next.
          The symbol '|' denotes a pipe
27. "cat filename | less "      which will show you only one scroll length of content at a time. 
    Instead of 'less', you can also use. 'pg' and 'more' commands,The less ,pg and more commands are used for dividing a long file into readable bits
28. "grep search_string"        To search existing string in a perticuler file or directory.

      Option 	    Function
        -v 	Shows all the lines that do not match the searched string
        -c 	Displays only the count of matching lines
        -n 	Shows the matching line and its number
        -i 	Match both (upper and lower) case
        -l 	Shows just the name of the file with the string 
       Ex: cat filename | grep -i a       Using the  'i' option grep has filtered the string 'a' (case-insensitive) from the all the lines.
29. "sort Filename"              This command helps in sorting out the contents of a file alphabetically.
        
            Optio           Function

             -r               Reverses  sorting
             -n	              Sorts numerically 
             -f	              Case insensitive sorting  


 Linux has a lot of filter commands like awk, grep, sed, spell, and wc. A filter takes input from one command, does some processing, and gives output.
When you pipe two commands, the "filtered " output of the first command is given to the next.
Linux/Unix Pipes , Grep & Sort Command 

30. "cat sample | grep -v a | sort - r"      We want to highlight only the lines that do not contain the character 'a', but the result should be in reverse order.


Regular expressions are special characters which help search data, matching complex patterns. Regular expressions are shortened as 'regexp' or 'regex'. 
some of the basic Regex.
         Symbol 	Descriptions
              . 	replaces any character
	      ^ 	matches start of string
	      $ 	matches end of string
 	      * 	matches up zero or more times the preceding character
 	      \ 	Represent special characters
	     () 	Groups regular expressions
	      ? 	Matches up exactly one character
 31. " cat sample | grep -E p\{2}"
We want to check that the character 'p' appears exactly 2 times in a string one after the other. For this the syntax would be:
   Expression 	Description
        {n}     Matches the preceding character appearing 'n' times exactly
      {n,m} 	Matches the preceding character appearing 'n' times but not more than m
      {n, } 	Matches the preceding character only when it appears 'n' times or more 
Note: You need to add -E with these regular expressions.

32. "cat sample|grep "a\+t""   Suppose we want to filter out lines where character 'a' precedes character 't'

       Expression 	Description

	\+		Matches one or more occurrence of the previous character

	\?		Matches zero or one occurrence of the previous character 

The syntax for brace expansion is either a sequence or a comma separated list of items inside curly braces "{}".
The brace expansion is used to generate strings. It helps in creating multiple strings out of one.

33. "echo {0..11} "  or "echo {a..z}"  or "echo a{0..9}b"

34. "echo $LANG"          environment variable stores the value of the language that the user understands.
		PATH    This variable contains a colon (:)-separated list of directories in which your system looks for executable files.
                USER 	The username
		HOME 	Default path to the user's home directory
                EDITOR 	Path to the program which edits the content of files
		UID 	User's unique ID
		TERM 	Default terminal emulator
		SHELL 	Shell being used by the user 

35. "env"                                     Command displays all the environment variables.Linux - Environment Variables 
36. "VARIABLE_NAME=variable_value"           You can create your own user defined environment variables.
37. "unset variablename"                     The following syntax can be used to remove a Variable from the system. 
38. "export Variable=value"                  To set value of an environment variable
39. "SSH username@ip-address or hostname"    The syntax to log into a remote Linux machine using SSH
40. "ping hostname="""                       To check whether your connection to the server is healthy or not.You may Press Ctrl + c to exit from the ping loop. 
    
ping also used for
    Analyzing network and host connections
    Tracking network performance and managing it
    Testing hardware and software issues

	FTP is file transfer protocol. It's the most preferred protocol for data transfer amongst computers.

You can use FTP to -

    Logging in and establishing a connection with a remote host
    Upload and download files
    Navigating through directories
    Browsing contents of the directories
41. "ftp hostname="""                        To establish an FTP connection to a remote host
                                             Once you enter this command, it will ask you for authentication via username and password.

Once a connection is established, and you are logged in, you may use the following commands to perform different actions. 

          Command 	       Function
            dir 	        Display files in the current directory of a remote computer
	    cd "dirname" 	change directory to "dirname" on a remote computer
 	    put file 		upload 'file' from local to remote computer
	    get file 		Download 'file' from remote to local computer
            quit 		Logout

Telnet helps to -

    connect to a remote Linux computer
    run programs remotely and conduct administration

42. "telnet hostname="""           Telnet utility.
    The utility will ask your username and password.
    Once authenticated, you can execute commands just like you have done so far, using the Terminal. The only difference is, 
    if you are connected to a remote host, the commands will be executed on the remote machine, and not your local machine. 
    You may exit the telnet connection by entering the command 'logout' 

43. "top"                           This utility tells the user about all the running processes on the Linux machine. 

 The terminology follows:
Field 	Description 	            Example 1 	Example 2
PID 	The process ID of each task 	1525 	961
User 	The username of task owner 	Home 	Root
PR 	Priority Can be20(highest) or -20(lowest) 	20 	20
NI 	The nice value of a task 	0 	0
VIRT 	Virtual memory used (kb) 	1775 	75972
RES 	Physical memory used (kb) 	100 	51
SHR 	Shared memory used (kb) 	28 	7952
S 	Status                           S       R
There are five types:

          'D' = uninterruptible sleep

          'R' = running

          'S' = sleeping

          'T' = traced or stopped

          'Z' = zombie                   
%CPU 	% of CPU time              	1.7 	 1.0
%MEM 	Physical memory used 	        10 	 5.1
TIME+ 	Total CPU time 	              5:05.34 	 2:23.42
Command 	Command name 	    Photoshop.exe  Xorg


44. "ps ux"                     To check all the processes running under a user,The command stands for 'Process Status'. 
                                It is similar to the "Task Manager" that pop-ups in a Windows Machine.

45. "kill PID"                  This command terminates running processes on a Linux machine.
                                To use these utilities you need to know the PID (process id) of the process you want to kill

46. "pidof Process name"        To find the PID of a process


 NICE

Linux can run a lot of processes at a time, which can slow down the speed of some high priority processes and result in poor performance.
To avoid this, you can tell your machine to prioritize processes as per your requirements.This priority is called Niceness in Linux, 
and it has a value between -20 to 19. The lower the Niceness index, the higher would be a priority given to that task.
The default value of all the processes is 0. 

47. "nice -n 'Nice value' process name"      To start a process with a niceness value other than the default value

48. "renice 'nice value' -p 'PID' "          If there is some process already running on the system, then you can 'Renice' its value using syntax.


 DF

This utility reports the free disk space(Hard Disk) on all the file systems. 

49. "'df -h'"                                If you want information in a readable format,
50. " Free"                                  This command shows the free and used memory (RAM) on the Linux system. 
            You can use the arguments

			free -m to display output in MB

			free -g to display output in GB 

51. "bg"                To run a stopped process in the foreground
52. "fg"                To run a stopped process in the foreground


 The VI editor is the most popular and classic text editor in the Linux family. Below, are some reasons which make it a widely used editor –

    It is available in almost all Linux Distributions
    It works the same across different platforms and Distributions
    It is user-friendly. Hence, millions of Linux users love it and use it for their editing needs

To work on VI editor, you need to understand its operation modes. They can be divided into two main parts.
Command mode:

    The vi editor opens in this mode, and it only understands commands
    In this mode, you can, move the cursor and cut, copy, paste the text
    This mode also saves the changes you have made to the file
    Commands are case sensitive. You should use the right letter case.
Insert mode:

    This mode is for inserting text in the file.
    You can switch to the Insert mode from the command mode  by pressing 'i' on the keyboard
    Once you are in Insert mode, any key would be taken as an input for the file on which you are currently working.
    To return to the command mode and save the changes you have made you need to press the Esc key

To launch the VI Editor -Open the Terminal (CLI) and type
54. "vi <filename_NEW> or <filename_EXISTING>"
  EX:  "vi sample1"
      vi editor opens in command mode 
      press "i" to enter insert mode
      add the content
      press "Esc" to enter to command mode 
      enter ":wq" and hit enter
      to check the file content type "cat sample1" and hit enter
Note: You should be in the "command mode" to execute these commands. VI editor is case-sensitive so make sure you type the commands in the right letter-case.
 Keystrokes 	Action
	i 	Insert at cursor (goes into insert mode)
	a 	Write after cursor (goes into insert mode)
	A 	Write at the end of line (goes into insert mode)
	ESC 	Terminate insert mode
	u 	Undo last change
	U 	Undo all changes to the entire line
	o 	Open a new line (goes into insert mode)
	dd	Delete line
	3dd 	Delete3 lines.
	D 	Delete contents of line after the cursor
	C 	Delete contents of a line after the cursor and insert new text. Press ESC key to end insertion.
	dw	Delete word
	4dw 	Delete 4 words
	cw 	Change word
	x 	Delete character at the cursor
	r 	Replace character
	R 	Overwrite characters from cursor onward
	s 	Substitute one character under cursor continue to insert
	S 	Substitute entire line and begin to insert at the beginning of the line
	~ 	Change case of individual character

Make sure you press the right command otherwise you will end up making undesirable changes to the file. 
You can also enter the insert mode by pressing a, A, o, as required. 


	Keystroke 	Use
	Shift+zz 	Save the file and quit
	:w 		Save the file but keep it open
	:q 		Quit without saving
	:wq 		Save the file and quit

Learning to use this editor can benefit you in creating scripts and editing files.


SHELL Scripting:

An Operating is made of many components, but its two prime components are -

    Kernel
    Shell

 A Kernel is at the nucleus of a computer. It makes the communication between the hardware and software possible. 
While the Kernel is the innermost part of an operating system, a shell is the outermost one.

A shell in a Linux operating system takes input from you in the form of commands, processes it, and then gives an output. 
It is the interface through which a user works on the programs, commands, and scripts. 

A shell is accessed by a terminal which runs it.When you run the terminal, the Shell issues a command prompt (usually $), where you can type your input,
which is then executed when you hit the Enter key. The output or the result is thereafter displayed on the terminal.

The Shell wraps around the delicate interior of an Operating system protecting it from accidental damage. Hence the name Shell

 There are two main shells in Linux:

1. The Bourne Shell: The prompt for this shell is $ and its derivatives are listed below:

    POSIX shell also is known as sh
    Korn Shell also knew as sh
    Bourne Again SHell also knew as bash (most popular)

2. The C shell: The prompt for this shell is %, and its subcategories are:

    C shell also is known as csh
    Tops C shell also is known as tcsh

Shell scripting is writing a series of command for the shell to execute. It can combine lengthy and repetitive sequences of commands into a single and simple script,
which can be stored and executed anytime. This reduces the effort required by the end user.

55. "#!/bin/sh"                "#!" is an operator called shebang which directs the script to the interpreter location. 
                                So, if we use"#! /bin/sh" the script gets directed to the bourne-shell. 
          Ex: vi sample1
            #!/bin/sh
            ls
56. "bash  file name"          To exicute the script.
57. "#coments "                To add coments with in the script.

        #!/bin/sh
        echo "what is your name?"
        read name
        echo "How do you do, $name?"
        read remark
        echo "I am $remark too!"


 Virtual Terminals enable a number of users to work on different programs at the same time on the same computer. 
This is the reason they are one of the most distinguished features of Linux.

Usually, there are six (default) virtual terminals on a Linux operating system, and you can log into them as different users to conducts different tasks.
 The steps to launch a Virtual terminal are:
1) Press Ctrl+Alt+F1 
2) Enter User ID and Password 
3) Now the Virtual Terminal is ready to work on 

 You can navigate between the 6 virtual terminals using the following command.

   "Ctrl + Alt + F (1 to 6) key"


 Virtual Terminal shortcuts

These are some of the shortcuts that you should be aware of while working on virtual terminals.
	Shortcut 	Function
	Home or Ctrl + a 	Move the cursor to the start of the current line
	End or Ctrl + e 	Move the cursor to the end of the current line
	Tab 			Autocomplete commands
	Ctrl + u 		Erase the current line
	Ctrl + w 		Delete the word before the cursor
	Ctrl + k 		Delete the line from the cursor position to the end
	reset 			Reset the terminal
	history 		List of commands executed by the user
	Arrow up 		Scroll up in history and enter to execute
	Arrow down 		Scroll down in history and enter to execute
	Ctrl + d 		Logout from the terminal
	Ctrl + Alt + Del 	Reboot the system

To return to the home screen of the Linux system, use Ctrl+Alt+F7 and it would take to you the terminal


Creating a User:

In Linux, every user is assigned an individual account which contains all the files, information, and data of the user. 
You can create multiple users in a Linux operating system. The steps to creating a user are:
Using Terminal:

Step 1) Use command sudo adduser  "sudo adduser name"
Step 2) Enter password for the new account and confirm 
Step 3) Enter details of the new user and press Y 

Using GUI:

Step 1) Go to the system settings look for an icon which says 'User Accounts'. 
Step 2) Click on the unlock icon and enter a password when prompted, then click the plus sign.
Step 3) A new window would pop up, asking you for adding information to the new user account.
The account type offers two choices - standard and administration(Ubuntu Limitation). 
If you want the new user to have administrative access to the computer, select Administrator as the account type.
Administrators can do things like add and delete users, install software and drivers, and change the date and time.
Step 4) The new account would show, but would be disabled by default.

To activate it, click the password option and add a new password. Click change to enable the account. 


Deleting, disabling account:
Terminal
For disabling an account using Terminal, remove the password set on the account.
58. "sudo passwd -l 'username'"
To delete an account, use the command - 
59. "sudo userdel -r 'username'"

You can view the existing groups on your Linux operating system by entering the following command:
60. "groupmod "Press Tab key twice""

To add a user to a group, use the following syntax:
61."sudo usermod -a -G GROUPNAME USERNAME"
62. "cat /etc/group"               You can check whether the user is in a group by this command.
63. "sudo deluser USER GROUPNAME"  Removing a user from Usergroup
 
If you do not want to run the  commands in terminal to manage users and groups, then you can install a GUI add-on .

64. "sudo apt-get install gnome-system-tools"
Once done, type 
65. "users-admin"


Finger:

This command is used to procure information of the users on a Linux machine. You can use it on both local & remote machines .

66. "finger"              gives data on all the logged users on the remote and local machine.
                          The syntax 'finger username' specifies the information of the user. 

Linux/Unix user management commands

Here is a list of linux user management commands

	Command					Description
	sudo adduser username			Adds a user
	sudo passwd -l 'username'		Disable a user
	sudo userdel -r 'username'		Delete a user
	sudo usermod -a -G GROUPNAME USERNAME	Add user a to a usergroup
	sudo deluser USER GROUPNAME		Remove user from a user group
	finger					Gives information on all logged in user
	finger username				Gives information of a particular user


67. "last -a"        To check who logedin into the mition 
68. "who -u"         To check who working on the mition
69. "less /var/log/secure"                To check logs of all the attempts made for login to your machine with authentication reports
70. "tail –f"                             you want to view the content of the log files real time.


Linux Log Files:

Linux provides a centralized repository of log files that can be located under the  /var/log directory.

The log files generated in a Linux environment can typically be classified into four different categories:

    Application Logs
    Event Logs
    Service Logs
    System Logs

71. "last reboot"                         To find out when was the system last rebooted,
72. "lastlog | more"                      To see when did someone last log in to the system,
73. "<comand> --help"                     To know about command specified by the user
74. "sudo chattr +i -V /path of the file" To set the file to immutable (or undeletable).
75. "lsattr"                              To check the permitions of a file or directory.
76. "sudo chattr +i -RV /file path"       you can recursively change attributes of directories and their contents
77. "sudo chattr -i /file path"           To retrive the file to mutable.
78. "lslogins -u"                         Shows information about known users in the system, the -u flag only displays user accounts.
79. "users"                               Shows the usernames of all users currently logged on the system like so.
